As civilians are evacuated from the besieged city, three young people tell of their terrifying escape and how their lives have been changed for ever
Russia-Ukraine war: latest updates
Headshot of Veronika, wearing thick-rimmed glasses, earrings and nose ring.
Veronika, a university student and keen ice hockey player, is now living as a refugee in a mountain village inside Ukraine.
Supported by
guardian.org
About this content
Larisa Kalick in Lviv
Fri 1 Apr 2022 06.00 BST
Veronika, 19
The months before the war were the best of my life. I was in my second year at university and one of the best students on the course. But the thing that brought my life true meaning was playing ice hockey. It was what I woke for every morning. On 23 February our coach told me of plans to set up a women’s hockey team to try and reach the professional league. I went to bed so happy, looking forward to the next day.
The next morning when I woke at 5.30am I didn’t immediately understand that it was explosions, and not my alarm clock, that had woken me up. My bed was shaking from the shockwaves.
Veronika and her grandmother sit on a sofa in the basement of her grandparents’ home in Mariupol, both wearing woolly hats.
Veronika and her grandmother in the basement of her grandparents’ home in Mariupol.
My mum and I came out of our bedrooms, barely understanding what was happening. For the first few hours we sat together, waiting for it all to finish, but the bombing just got worse. So we packed a suitcase and ran to my grandparents’ basement.
As soon as I got into the basement I realised my life as I had known it was over. Hockey, work, friends, a man with whom I was very much in love, all of these things finished that day. That is probably why I do not feel anything any more: no fear, no pain, no anger, no desire to live. I feel like I died at 5.30am on 24 February.
There was nothing in the dusty basement. We had no ventilation or water, and electricity only for a short time. The four of us ate a piece of bread and a sweet twice a day. The basement and building were shaking under the constant explosions. Our phones were cut off. It was like being in an underground box. We had no idea whether it was day or night.
Advertisement
Soon we began hearing new sounds. We did not immediately realise that Russian aircraft were dropping bombs. We were able to stretch out our food until 8 March, surviving on mouldy bread. Sometimes the adults went up to look at the sky, the light, but I was not allowed. When snow fell, we were delighted: it could be eaten and drunk. But by that point I was completely dehydrated and had lost all hunger and thirst.
Katerina Shukh with her grandparents, Kateryna Nemenushyaya and Viktor Nemeenushiy, in Borzęcin Duży, Poland, last week
‘I never imagined strangers could be so close’: five Ukrainian families on starting again in the EU
Read more
My mother and I were given the opportunity to move from the left bank to the city centre, which at that point was a little safer. But for reasons I can’t go into, only the two of us could go. We said farewell to my grandparents. I have not heard anything more of them.
From 8 March we hid in a warehouse on the left bank. The hunger, thirst and cold continued, and we tried not to succumb to mass hysteria. There was a market nearby and we ran there under the bombing to forage for the remains of vegetables among the rubble and burning cars. We were risking our lives for rotting vegetables.
By 14 March we realised that we could not survive on the tiny amount of food and water we could find, so we decided to leave. We found someone with a car and drove out of the city. To me at this point it was all the same. Die in a warehouse or die in the middle of the road from Mariupol. A few days later we learned that the whole area we were hiding in had been burned down.
Female resident holding loaves of bread outside a damaged building in Mariupol, 28 March. On left of picture, a child eats from a loaf of bread.
Residents collect loaves of bread outside a damaged building in Mariupol, 28 March. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters
Advertisement
Eventually we reached Zaporizhzhia, where it was safe. From there we made it to Lviv and are now in a small village in the mountains.
Apart from my mother I do not know where my family are. My grandparents’ building was razed to the ground and our family’s apartment is probably occupied by Chechen Kadyrovtsy [militia], who are helping the Russians. I feel sick thinking about them touching my childhood photos or my hockey kit.
Who is responsible for this? Who will apologise? Who will return my stolen life to me? Just like my home city, I have the sense that I no longer exist. I have severe skin problems due to the lack of hygiene, and the dust in the basement means I am always short of breath. I no longer have a normal relationship with food.
I could become a refugee but all I want is to go to the door of my own home, which I will never open again. Although we are safe for now I will never recover from this trauma; it will haunt me for my whole life.
Yegor says his family passed through at least a dozen Russian checkpoints on their journey from Mariupol to Dnipro.
Yegor says his family passed through at least a dozen Russian checkpoints on their journey from Mariupol to Dnipro.
Yegor, 15
Martial law meant that, on 24 February, school was closed. Our family did not take the idea of war too seriously but decided to pack and move to the centre of Mariupol, to our grandmother’s apartment.
Once we reached the centre, things were initially fine: we couldn’t hear any shooting, but my friends on the left bank were sending voice notes with the sounds of guns. A few days later, they started shooting near us. We could hear and feel daily that the Russians were getting closer.
Advertisement
On 2 March we lost electricity, water and communication. The generators stopped working and even the air raid sirens failed. Three days later the heating was turned off and we began to get very cold. We all slept in the same bed, trying to stay warm.
Mum cooked food in the yard of the apartment block. We did not even have bread: we made little doughnuts from water, flour and salt, and cooked soups without meat. There was no water.
With the electricity cut off, people prepare food over a makeshift stove in a yard during the siege of Mariupol.
With the electricity cut off, people prepare food over a makeshift stove in a yard during the siege of Mariupol. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters
Things began getting much more dangerous. A lot of people began arriving from the left bank, including a lot of teenagers my age. One day I heard a cluster bomb fall about 20 metres from me and explode. The Russians say they only hit military targets, but the many corpses on the streets told a different story.
We left the city on 16 March. As we drove through Mariupol, the only things still standing were ruins, destroyed buildings, craters from missile strikes. Black smoke hung everywhere. We decided to leave without knowing about the “green corridor” because nobody in Mariupol knew about these routes, but we found ourselves in a huge movement of people trying to leave.
We got out of the city, taking nine hours to drive 20km [12 miles]. We could see a huge column of tanks, armoured personnel carriers, buses and cars, containing Chechens and displaying the letter Z, which Russia is using as a symbol of war.
We left for Dnipro after two days. There were about 15 Russian checkpoints along the way: they stopped everyone and demanded that photos of Mariupol, the wrecked architecture and destroyed buildings, were deleted. They wanted to give the impression they were not touching the civilian population. They made my mum show them her phone gallery, and removed memory cards from the car’s video recorders.
Advertisement
Now we are reunited with my grandparents. It is warm and cosy; we have light and gas. It is quiet for now. Yet I know the war is not over. Every generation has its times of suffering. Our grandparents knew war, and now we do as well.
A man walks with a bicycle in a street with heavily bomb-damaged buildings and blasted trees.
A Mariupol street devastated by shelling. Photograph: Evgeniy Maloletka/AP
Edik, 15
In our family, everyone – my mum, brother and I – listens to my father. We have always been against Ukraine and firmly on Putin’s side. Dad says Putin has lifted Russia up and cares about all of its people.
I used to be an ordinary teenager, studying and going out with friends. In February everyone started talking about the war, but I didn’t believe it: I was more concerned about schoolwork.
On 24 February the bombs began landing on Mariupol and our parents told us to pack up. In the first few days our electricity, communications, water and gas were cut off. On the second day a rocket destroyed our school.
Four children wearing padded jackets and hats pose with a large dog.
Children in a bomb shelter in Mariupol, 6 March. Photograph: Evgeniy Maloletka/AP
Advertisement
When there was an explosion nearby, we went down to the basement. We stayed there for 20 days and the entire time was a struggle to stay alive. Sometimes we would dash home and get things from our apartment. We would run in and lie on the floor so they wouldn’t shoot at us.
Between 9 March and 12 March, the building began taking direct hits. It was terrifying. Mum cried, Dad shook with worry. One day Dad went upstairs and a rocket flew into the next apartment. The shockwave deafened him, and his eardrums burst, but he was lucky. Later our building completely burned down. We lost everything.
On 16 March, soldiers from the [self-proclaimed] Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) came to rescue us. They told us Ukrainian snipers were sitting in the next building, killing everyone. We were assured they would save us from the Ukrainians, who had apparently seized everything. They said the Russian air force would soon strike our homes to destroy the Ukrainian nationalists. We were taken out and, when we left our neighbourhood, saw black smoke rising above the apartment blocks.
Two pro-Russian troops stand guard at a checkpoint. Three cars drive into the distance - nearest car has boot overloaded with luggage
Cars pass a pro-Russian checkpoint as they leave the besieged city, 17 March. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters
We were taken to Bezymennoye, 30km from Mariupol, where we were given food and clothes. Now we are in Yaroslavl, north-east of Moscow and are waiting to be settled somewhere.
Advertisement
I believe the Ukrainians are guilty and caused the suffering of everyone in our basement. They shot at civilians, killed people at night, and Russia saved us. If it was not for Russia, the Ukrainians would have come down and shot all of us.
When the DPR take Mariupol and rebuild everything, I will return home. It will be wonderful if I can return to the place where I was born.
Adults and children wear device that monitors glucose level and adjusts amount of insulin delivered
Charlotte Abbott-Pierce
Charlotte Abbott-Pierce, six, has become one of the first people to benefit from an artificial pancreas. Photograph: NHS
Andrew Gregory Health editor
Fri 1 Apr 2022 06.01 BST
Hundreds of adults and children with type 1 diabetes in England have been fitted with an artificial pancreas that experts say could become the “holy grail” for managing the disease, in a world-first trial on the NHS.
The groundbreaking device uses an algorithm to determine the amount of insulin that should be administered and reads blood sugar levels to keep them steady. The NHS trial has so far found the technology more effective at managing diabetes than current devices and that it requires far less input from patients.
Managing type 1 diabetes can be challenging, especially in young children, owing to variations in the levels of insulin required and unpredictability around how much patients eat and exercise. Children are particularly at risk of dangerously low blood sugar levels (hypoglycaemia) and high ones (hyperglycaemia), which can damage the body or even lead to death.
Advertisement
Now a new artificial pancreas worn next to the body – which continually monitors blood glucose levels and automatically adjusts insulin delivered via a pump – is being tested in 30 NHS diabetes centres. About 875 people have benefited so far in the first nationwide study of its kind in the world.
The technology can eliminate finger-prick tests to check blood sugar levels and prevent hypoglycaemic and hyperglycaemia attacks. Although most of the NHS’s estimated £10bn annual spending on diabetes treatment goes on type 2 diabetes, it is also hoped the devices will help cut costs by ensuring less need for interventions for type 1 cases.
“Having machines monitor and deliver medication for diabetes patients sounds quite sci-fi-like, but when you think of it, technology and machines are part and parcel of how we live our lives every day,” said Prof Partha Kar, the NHS national speciality adviser for diabetes.
“A device picks up your glucose levels, sends the reading across to the delivery system – AKA the pump – and then the system kicks in to assess how much insulin is needed. It is not very far away from the holy grail of a fully automated system, where people with type 1 diabetes can get on with their lives without worrying about glucose levels or medication.”
Charlotte Abbott-Pierce, six, was diagnosed just over a year ago and initially started on insulin injections but has now become one of the first people to benefit from an artificial pancreas.
She has been fitted with an insulin pump and a continuous glucose monitor that, as part of the world first pilot, now work together.
A woman with diabetes monitors her glucose levels.
People with type 1 diabetes in England to be given skin sensor to monitor blood sugar
Read more
Advertisement
Her mother, Ange Abbott-Pierce, said: “Before the hybrid closed loop system was fitted, my husband and I would be up every two hours every night having to check Charlotte’s blood sugars and most times giving insulin, sometimes doing finger pricks or dealing with ketones due to quick rises in blood sugar.” She said the new system was a “godsend to us as we were at our wits’ end with worry, not being able to catch the highs before they got dangerous”.
Chris Askew, chief executive of Diabetes UK, said: “This technology has the potential to transform the lives of people with type 1 diabetes, improving both their quality of life and clinical outcomes.”
The data collected from the pilot, along with other evidence, will be considered by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence when it looks at rolling the device out more widely.
Separately, new research on Friday reveals that even slim people can get remission from type 2 diabetes by managing their calorie intake.
A trial led by Prof Roy Taylor of Newcastle University found 70% of participants with a low body mass index (BMI) went into type 2 remission thanks to diet-controlled weight loss, despite not being obese or overweight. Obesity raises the risk of type 2 diabetes, but 10% of sufferers have lower BMIs.
His previous landmark research gave hope to millions of type 2 diabetics who were overweight by showing it was possible to go into remission through careful weight loss. It showed that shedding fat from inside the pancreas and liver – the two key organs involved in blood sugar control – was key to remission from type 2 in people living with obesity or being overweight.
Now researchers have found it also works for slimmer diabetics – with a BMI at or just above the healthy range, below 27. Taylor said: “This is very good news for everyone with type 2 diabetes.”
Covid-19 vaccines provide significant extra protection for people who have already been infected, according to two new studies.
The jabs have proven highly effective in protecting those who have never had Covid, but their effectiveness at preventing symptoms and severe outcomes in people who have previously been infected has, until recently, been less clear.
Now two separate pieces of research, published in the Lancet Infectious Diseases journal, confirm that Covid-19 vaccines provide additional protection for people who have already been infected with Sars-CoV-2 – especially against severe disease.
In the first study, conducted in Brazil, researchers found that four vaccines – CoronaVac, Oxford/AstraZeneca, Janssen and Pfizer/BioNTech – provide extra protection against symptomatic reinfection and severe outcomes such as hospitalisation and death in people who had previously caught coronavirus.
The second study, from Sweden, found that vaccination against Covid-19 provided additional protection to those who had had Covid before, for at least nine months.
Together, the studies provide crucial data on vaccine effectiveness in people with a prior infection and underline the benefits of getting vaccinated regardless of whether someone has had Covid. Experts say the findings could also help inform global vaccine strategies.
“Covid-19 vaccines have been proven to be highly effective at preventing symptomatic infection and hospitalisation among those with no prior infection but effectiveness for those with prior infection is less clear,” said the author of the first study, Julio Croda, of Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul and Fundação.
Advertisement
“Understanding the duration and effectiveness of immunity for those vaccinated with a previous Covid-19 diagnosis becomes increasingly important as the pandemic progresses and surges … new cases may occur as a result of more transmissible variants. Further research on the need for vaccination for those with a previous Covid-19 infection is a vital step to pandemic policy intervention including guidance on single dose or two dose vaccine protection.”
In the first study, which involved more than 22,000 people who became reinfected with Covid, the data showed that being vaccinated reduced their risk of symptoms, being hospitalised or dying.
“All four of these vaccines have proven to provide significant extra protection for those with a previous Covid-19 infection, reducing hospitalisation and death,” said Croda. “There has been ongoing public debate about whether previously infected individuals need to be vaccinated. Our results suggest that vaccine benefits far outweigh any potential risk and support the case for vaccination, including the full vaccine series, among individuals with prior Sars-CoV-2 infection.”
Writing in the same journal, Pramod Kumar Garg, of the Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, India, who was not involved in the study, said: “The results of [the Brazil] study and other recent studies challenge the concept of population-level herd immunity through natural infection alone against Sars-CoV-2 and suggest that vaccinating individuals who were previously infected provides further protection, particularly against severe disease. These data should help guide policy decisions and mitigate vaccine hesitancy among people who had Sars-CoV-2 infection.”
The second study, involving almost 3 million people, found that one vaccine dose in someone with infection-driven immunity from a previous infection lowered their risk of reinfection by 58% two months after the jab. Two doses of vaccine lowered the risk of infection by 66%.
The authors acknowledged limitations with both studies, including a risk of bias due to the observational nature of the research. Additionally, neither study included an analysis of reinfection from the Omicron variants.
Writing in the same journal, Jennifer Juno, of the University of Melbourne, Australia, who was not involved in either study, said: “These data confirm, in a large cohort, the added protective benefit of vaccination among individuals recovered from Covid-19.”
Young LGBTQ+ people in the UK are facing a “hidden epidemic” of abuse by close family members based on their sexuality or gender identity, according to a study.
Nearly one in three LGBTQ+ people have experienced abuse – ranging from verbal harassment to threats of homelessness and physical violence – by a relative, most often their own parents, with two-thirds of them aged under 18 when the abuse first occurred, research for the anti-abuse charity Galop found.
The report, seen by the Guardian, aims “to shine a light on abuse happening to LGBTQ+ people behind closed doors in the UK” as well as highlight the potential barriers survivors face when seeking help.
Advertisement
Leni Morris, the charity’s CEO, said: “When someone suffers abuse which targets them for who they fundamentally are, especially at such a formative age and at the hands of such an influential person, the repercussions are often lifelong. This report echoes the severity and complexity of cases we are supporting at Galop, often within which victims have never told anyone about their experience.”
The survey of more than 5,000 LGBTQ+ people, conducted in February by YouGov, also reveals:
 Transgender and non-binary people surveyed experienced higher levels of abuse from family members (43%).
 5% of LGBTQ+ respondents reported being subjected to conversion practices, with a family member attempting to change, “cure” or suppress their sexual orientation or gender identity, increasing to 11% of trans and non-binary respondents.
 60% of respondents who had experienced abuse from their family felt their LGBTQ+ identity was either the main reason or part of the reason.
 63% of LGBTQ+ people surveyed were under 18 when they first experienced abuse from their family, and 30% were below the age of 11.
A protester holds up a sign during a Reclaim Pride protest last year.
Boris Johnson backtracks over LGBT conversion practices ban after backlash
Read more
Respondents described instances of regular humiliation by relatives, having their interactions with friends monitored, being outed by a sibling or thrown out of the family home and banned from visiting, as well as longer-term impacts on their capacity to build close relationships or feel comfortable with their sexuality.
As a result of the findings, Galop is recommending long-term dedicated funding for specialist “by and for” services to support LGBTQ+ survivors of abuse, and for police, other agencies and support services to improve their understanding of family abuse.
Advertisement
Morris added: “Anti-LGBTQ+ abuse from family members is often misinterpreted by statutory services as ‘generational differences’ or having ‘different values’ rather than seeing it for what it really is – domestic abuse. This leads to many LGBTQ+ people not having access to the support and help that they need in order to safely leave these abusive situations.
“LGBTQ+ people who try to escape abuse don’t have enough suitable accommodation in the UK to meet their needs. We regularly see LGBTQ+ victims of abuse and violence forced to choose between potentially dangerous emergency accommodation, homelessness, or staying with their abusers.”
Hundreds of environmental protesters have blocked seven oil terminals across the country as part of a campaign to paralyse the UK’s fossil fuel infrastructure.
Early on Friday, supporters of Just Stop Oil began blockades at oil refineries around London, Birmingham and Southampton by climbing on top of tankers and gluing themselves to road surfaces.
Shortly after 4am, activists blocked terminals in Purfleet and Grays, Essex, which they said were the biggest in the country. In Tamworth, near Birmingham, a group of more than two dozen protesters had been hoping to disrupt the nearby Kingsbury oil terminal. However, due to police intervention they were able only to block a road leading to the site.
Advertisement
Just Stop Oil has demanded that the government agree to halt all new licences for fossil fuel projects in the UK. They have vowed to continue disrupting the UK’s oil infrastructure until the government agrees.
Louis McKecknie, 21 from Weymouth, who last month zip-tied his neck to a goalpost at Goodison Park, Everton’s football ground, as part of the campaign, said: “I don’t want to be doing this but our genocidal government gives me no choice. They know that oil is funding Putin’s war and pushing millions of people into fuel poverty while energy companies reap billions in profits. They know that to allow more oil and gas extraction in the UK is suicidal and will accelerate global heating.
“It means millions dying of heat stress, losing their homes or having to fight for food. This is the future for my generation, I stop when oil stops.”
The action is part of a planned series of protests against UK oil infrastructure. Extinction Rebellion, which is to begin its next wave of protests on 9 April, said it supported the Just Stop Oil campaign and had mobilised its activists to join.
Just Stop Oil has said its campaign marks a shift from civil disobedience to civil resistance. What this means, one supporter told the Guardian last month, “is stopping pointing out what the government should or shouldn’t be doing [and instead] actively stopping government doing what they shouldn’t be”.
Friday’s blockades came in defiance of a temporary high court injunction banning groups from protesting outside oil terminals. Outside Kingsbury and on roads leading to the site, posters said: “Temporary high court injunction in force. Blocking, slowing down, obstructing or interfering with traffic on to this road as part of protest activity by Just Stop Oil, Extinction Rebellion, Insulate Britain movements and other connected movements is strictly prohibited. Failure to comply with the injunction may lead to imprisonment.”
Advertisement
In Tamworth, activists had gathered in a nearby McDonald’s before making their way to the site but were initially deterred from acting by a police helicopter.
One activist said scouts had seen large numbers of police in unmarked cars near the site. They feared that if they got into vehicles for the last leg of their intended journey they would be pulled over and arrested, but hoped they could find a way through. Eventually, the group split up and most made their way to Kingsbury on foot.
Activists in Tamworth said police had tried to prevent them from reaching the Kingsbury oil terminal but realised they had no power to obstruct or detain them. By just after 8am on Friday, several had managed to make their way to the site’s main entrance, where they sat to block lorries from leaving or entering the site.
“It’s us against the state,” said one protester. “And we’re going to lose, but we have to try something.”
Patrick Demarchelier, the fashion photographer who worked with high-profile figures including Diana, Princess of Wales, has died at the age of 78.
His death was announced by his representatives on Instagram on Thursday. “It is with great sadness that we announce the passing of Patrick Demarchelier on 31 March 2022, at the age of 78,” the post read. “He is survived by his wife Mia, his three sons Gustaf, Arthur, Victor and three grandchildren.”
Demarchelier produced the cover for the 1991 December issue of Vogue that featured Diana. He worked for a multitude of other top magazines including Harper’s Bazaar, Elle and Rolling Stone, as well as many high-end fashion brands. He helped shoot advertisement campaigns for Dior, Chanel, Yves Saint Laurent, Tommy Hilfiger and Carolina Herrera.
Advertisement
During his career, Demarchelier photographed a string of high-profile celebrities including Beyonce, Jennifer Lopez, and Madonna.
But in 2018, seven women models accused the photographer of sexual assault, allegations Demarchelier denied, branding them “ridiculous”. In response to the allegations, publisher Condé Nast stopped working with him.
He was mentioned in the 2006 film The Devil Wears Prada, when he is sought after by the fashion juggernaut Miranda Priestly, played by Meryl Streep.
Among those paying tribute to Demarchelier were the US designer Vera Wang and models including Bella Hadid, Cindy Crawford and Hailey Bieber. Wang said she was “saddened to the core” by the news and would “always treasure” Demarchelier’s talent and kindness.
Sharing a picture of one of their final shoots together, she wrote: “We began our fashion journey together on a SHOPHOUND shoot for American Vogue where he met his wife Mia. I will always treasure his talent, his kindness and our long history. So many sittings for Vogue, then ad campaigns for Vera Wang, the company.
“I am saddened to the core. To his wife and family, I send my love. May he rest in peace forever more.”
The celebrity hair stylist Sam McKnight, who also worked with Diana, said he had “so much” to thank Demarchelier for. “Oh I am so sad to hear this,” he replied to the original post. “I had the best times with Patrick, endless incredible iconic photos, wonderful memories, a lifetime of laughter, I have so much to thank him for, there will never be another.”
Advertisement
He added: “Oh, dear Patrick, how you made us laugh. Thank you for having me around for the beautiful ride. Rest in peace my friend.”
Hadid said: “I am grateful to have been lucky enough to be in front of your lens. Most gentle, most legendary, soft but full of life. You will be missed Patrick. Rest in peace. I will miss this day, and you dear Patrick.”
Sharing pictures of herself taken by Demarchelier, Crawford said: “Rest in peace, @patrickdemarchelier. Thanks for so many great memories and beautiful, timeless images.”
The actor Kate Hudson said she had always enjoyed working with the photographer and sent a “ton of love” to his family. “So many memories. I had the pleasure of being photographed by Patrick often and always enjoyed him and his team so much,” she wrote.
The national lottery operator Camelot is launching a high court challenge to the Gambling Commission’s decision to hand over the operation of the draw to a rival after 28 years, accusing the regulator of getting the decision “badly wrong”.
In a statement, Camelot’s chief executive, Nigel Railton, said: “We are launching a legal challenge today in our capacity as an applicant for the fourth [national lottery] licence because we firmly believe that the Gambling Commission has got this decision badly wrong.”
Allwyn, a lottery operator owned by the Czech billionaire Karel Komárek, is in line to take over from Camelot in 2024, after beating the incumbent in a four-way battle that also included Sisal, owned by the Paddy Power parent, Flutter, and the media tycoon Richard Desmond.
“When we received the result, we were shocked by aspects of the decision,” Railton said.
“Despite lengthy correspondence, the commission has failed to provide a satisfactory response. We are therefore left with no choice but to ask the court to establish what happened.
Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk
“Irrespective of Camelot’s dual roles as current operator and applicant for the next national lottery licence, the competition is one of the largest UK government-sponsored procurements and the process deserves independent scrutiny.
“Separately, more than 1,000 Camelot employees work tirelessly to successfully operate the national lottery under the current licence and, at the very least, they are owed a proper explanation.”
ouis McKechnie is the face that launched a thousand British football memes. In March, the 21-year-old caused a stop to play when he ran onto the pitch at Goodison Park during a match between Everton and Newcastle and zip-tied himself to a goalpost by his neck.
If anything could have enraged the 40,000 jeering football fans more, it was the solemnity with which he did it. But while for many the episode will have merely been jotted down as another entry in the annals of absurdity, his cause was deadly serious.
Sign up to Down to Earth, our exclusive weekly newsletter from our top climate crisis correspondents.
A day earlier, Maddie, 21, and Kai, 20 – who did not give their surnames – attempted to stage a similar action at Arsenal’s Emirates Stadium in north London. Kai took a long pause and looked around him at the slowly filling stands before describing how he felt about what they had planned.
“Every single second I spend here, I want to do what I’m going to do less, because I can see everyone just trying to have a nice time,” he said. “But I know it’s what is right; I know that it has to happen.”
Louis McKechnie ties himself to the net in protest during the Premier League match between Everton and Newcastle United at Goodison Park on 17 March, 2022 in Liverpool, England
Louis McKechnie ties himself to the net in protest during the Premier League match between Everton and Newcastle United at Goodison Park on 17 March, 2022 in Liverpool, England Photograph: Michael Regan/Getty Images
Advertisement
Fuel to the fire
Louis, Maddie and Kai are all young activists with a climate group called Just Stop Oil. They have called on the UK government to halt all new fossil fuel projects in order to avoid the worst effects of climate change. If their efforts fail, they intend to paralyse the supply chain themselves, using non-violent direct action to disrupt the strategic oil and gas infrastructure that keeps the UK moving.
The ambition is big. “We are mobilising upwards of 1,000 people,” one JSO activist told the Guardian. “This is going to be a fusion of other large-scale blockade-style actions you have seen in the past.”
Just Stop Oil say they are taking inspiration from UK lorry drivers’ protests in 2000, when, furious at a rise in fuel duty, hauliers and farmers staged blockades that paralysed petrol distribution. Hundreds of petrol stations ran dry, leading to empty shelves in supermarkets, delays to mail deliveries and schools being closed. Protests ended after the government said it would order soldiers to secure deliveries, but they won: then-chancellor Gordon Brown announced in that year’s budget that fuel duty would be frozen.
But where 20 years ago those protesters enjoyed public support in their campaign against rising prices, Just Stop Oil’s target is the fossil fuel system itself. While polling shows large majorities regard the climate as one of the most important issues of the moment, it’s unclear whether that understanding would continue if the pumps were empty.
At a recruitment meeting last Thursday in Camden, north London, Larch Maxey, a veteran eco-campaigner, said the aim was “to build a community of civil resistance in response to the climate change science”.
“In 2022 you have got tens of thousands of peer-reviewed papers spelling out the climate science,” he said. Authorities such as David Attenborough and David King, the former government chief science officer, were in agreement, he said: there is a narrow window of two to three years in which to act. “We are facing the end of civilisation if we do not act on the climate emergency. We are heading towards societal collapse.
“When your house is on fire, you stop pouring petrol on the flames,” he said. “That’s basically the demand – no new licences. We are in a crisis. Let’s stop digging out new oil and gas.”
Activists from the Just Stop Oil campaign group, with hands glued to the road, protest against the use of oil after the arrivals for the Baftas
Activists from the Just Stop Oil campaign group, with hands glued to the road, protest against the use of oil after the arrivals for the Baftas Photograph: Tolga Akmen/AFP/Getty Images
Advertisement
New kids on the blockade
Just Stop Oil doesn’t just share rhetoric with Extinction Rebellion, it sits within an arc of escalation that began with that group’s blockades of five Thames bridges in 2018. Since then, the environmental movement has continued to explore new non-violent tactical provocations to draw attention to its demands.
Many of those involved are, like Maxey, veterans of XR and the HS2 protests; McKechnie is one of a number who took action with Insulate Britain. As with those groups, the silhouette of Roger Hallam also looms behind Just Stop Oil. Although the Guardian has been told it is wrong to describe Hallam as the mastermind of this latest campaign, he featured prominently in early coverage of its activities.
The key shift in Just Stop Oil is what its supporters say is a move from civil disobedience and into civil resistance. What that means, as Jess Causby, 25, a supporter of the campaign, told the Guardian last month, “is stopping pointing out what the government should or shouldn’t be doing [and instead] actively stopping government doing what they shouldn’t be.”
The question is whether they can pull it off. The record of actions attended by Guardian reporters has not immediately seemed propitious. Young activists who tried to storm the red carpet at the Baftas two weeks ago misjudged how difficult it would be to reach, and ended up blocking its road-entrance instead. Kai and Maddie were intercepted before they could prove a nuisance at Arsenal. A small group who tried to disrupt play at Tottenham were also swiftly handled.
Their next plan is to tackle a much bigger target, and they can expect to be anticipated. Oil companies have already begun to make preparations. What will happen next remains to be seen.
This piece first appeared in Down to Earth, the Guardian’s climate crisis newsletter, on Thursday 31 March before Friday’s protests at oil terminals across the UK. Sign up here to read more exclusive pieces like this and for a digest of the week’s biggest environment stories every Thursday
Why does it make me uneasy when straight women write TV shows about lesbians?
Emma Brockes
Emma Brockes
I know, I know: I sound bitter and chippy. But lesbianism is a very specific thing, not a proxy for feelings of outsiderdom
Suranne Jones (right) as Anne Lister and Sophie Rundle as Ann Walker in Gentleman Jack.
Suranne Jones (right) as Anne Lister and Sophie Rundle as Ann Walker in Gentleman Jack. Photograph: BBC/Lookout Point/HBO/Aimee Spinks/PA
Fri 1 Apr 2022 08.00 BST
125
To quote Nora Ephron in her take-down of Dorothy Schiff, I feel bad about what I’m going to do here. It’s not a take-down, but still, I feel bad. I am probably in the wrong. I’m being all the things one is accused of in these instances, in good faith and bad: chippy, oversensitive, territorial, ungenerous and, as my mother would have said, looking for nonsense. I have tried to frame the following less as opinion than reporting. I am, merely, passing on a conversation presently taking place among lesbians who watch a lot of prestige TV and tend to notice who wrote it. But I can only maintain the delusion so far. At some point, neutrality gives way to something else.
It’s about Sally Wainwright – sort of – who of course, we all love. We love Wainwright because we love Sarah Lancashire and Suranne Jones, her two leading ladies. There isn’t a lesbian in Britain who isn’t in love with Suranne Jones. I have no opinion about this, I am simply reporting the facts. The same goes for Sarah Lancashire. Wainwright is justifiably one of the most beloved creators of TV in Britain. Last week, she was to be found in this paper promoting season two of Gentleman Jack, her BBC/HBO show about Anne Lister, the landowner who rocked around Yorkshire in the mid-19th century, enthusiastically seducing women. Lister has been styled, by HBO and others, as the “first modern lesbian”.
Almost superhuman in her piercing energy … Suranne Jones as Anne Lister in Gentleman Jack.
‘Uncompromisingly gay’: Sally Wainwright on turning Gentleman Jack into a global icon
Read more
Advertisement
Most of us agree that, as a broad principle, anyone can write about anything they like, and Wainwright has written a lot about lesbians; in Last Tango in Halifax, in At Home With the Braithwaites, and now in Gentleman Jack. Lesbianism is a useful plot point, like murder, or infidelity and historically has tended to be treated in one of three ways on screen: with lurid disdain, with lascivious voyeurism – think Sharon Stone in Basic Instinct – or with dreary, agonised despair. Lesbians are, generally, so grateful not to be depicted as weirdos, murderers, or sexless creatures in bonnets picking up stones off a beach, that when a halfway decent writer comes along and gives them attention, they – we – are quite forgiving if the details are off. Better a sympathetic straight woman than Jed Mercurio.
I’m making a wild assumption here. Wainwright, who until they separated was married for 29 years to a man with whom she has two adult children, could conceivably identify as queer. But anyway, her lived experience, shall we say, is not that of a woman married to a woman in a starkly homophobic society. In the Guardian last week she said of Gentleman Jack that it was a story, “so life-affirming, uplifting and clever. She didn’t die at the end – she got her big romantic reconciliation. That’s what gay women responded to”. She put this in contrast to Last Tango in Halifax, a great show with a central storyline about lesbians in which Kate, one half of a gay couple, goes under a car. “I got slated for that,” said Wainwright. “Apparently, all lesbians die in telly, which I just didn’t know.” Ha; yeah; it’s almost as if you don’t know much about the experiences of the people you’re writing about.
See? We’re chippy. It comes from decades of shitty representation, or no representation at all. And by the standards of what came before, Wainwright’s treatment of lesbians is of course nuanced and sympathetic. And so here I am, wringing my hands. Why am I being mean about this nice straight lady writing gentle plot lines that, OK, in some places bear absolutely no relation whatsoever to experiences an actual gay person has had – in Last Tango, Kate shags her ex-boyfriend to conceive a baby she wants to raise with her girlfriend, while the girlfriend sits uncomplainingly downstairs. Have you ever sat next to a lesbian? We complain. A lot. About everything. That woman is not sitting there in a hotel bar while her girlfriend has sex in the room with a guy. If she’s not storming upstairs to create a scene, at the very least she has a drink problem.
Advertisement
Some of the irritation here is just market economics. Women’s stories take up less space than men’s; lesbian stories a tiny portion within that. Production companies will routinely say they have their “one gay” story of the season and it will inevitably be about gay men. It is easier to be a gay man than a lesbian because it is easier to be a man than a woman. Just look at Ryan Murphy, swaggering around Hollywood promoting great stories about gay men. Where is his female counterpart? (I’ll tell you where she is, she’s in the closet.)
I’m aware that none of this leads anywhere good. The appropriation debate only ends in gridlock. If a writer is vetoed on the basis of who they are, what about an actor? Sarah Silverman raised this issue last year when she called out non-Jewish actors for effectively donning “Jewface”, pointing in particular to the non-Jewish actor who plays Mrs Maisel, and the propriety of Felicity Jones being cast as Ruth Bader Ginsberg. Nuances might be missed, but in my view this isn’t about performance. With a good enough writer or actor the differences can be largely surmounted. It’s not even about employment opportunity, although there is that. It’s a largely emotional response, a request for basic acknowledgment. If you belong to a minority that has, historically, been blocked from proportionate access to the market, it sits really badly to watch someone from a category of greater privilege use your stories for their own advancement.
‘The deep truth of any marginalised identity is only available to those who live that identity’ … Mirren as Meir in the forthcoming film Golda.
‘Why don’t Jews play Jews?’ – David Baddiel on the row over Helen Mirren as Golda Meir
Read more
Bitter! Did I mention we’re also quite bitter? And here’s the worst part. The defence often used by straight people writing about gay people is that they, too, have felt estrangement in their lives and so understand the terrain. This extends beyond writing to less tangible areas. Here’s Tilda Swinton, identifying as queer “not in terms of my sexual life,” as she told the Guardian this year, but because as a young person she was “just odd”. I’ve seen similar comments by other artists, referring to a disconnect they represent in their fiction as gayness. Guess what? We don’t entirely love that! Gayness is not a catch-all category for people struggling with feelings of rejection. No one wants to be used metaphorically. No one wants to be a proxy for someone else’s social unease. People tend to be wedded to the specificities of their own experience, particularly when it comes to representation. Common cause is wonderful and with any luck, in 20 years, none of this will matter. But it matters now.
And so here we are. I loved Happy Valley. I loved huge chunks of Last Tango. I feel abject and unhappy raising all this. But as a friend – a massive dyke, let’s be clear, not someone with a nebulous sense of generalised anxiety looking for a convenient peg to hang it on – said to me the other day on the subject of Swinton, Wainwright, and some of the others gently congratulating themselves for claiming affinity with an experience to which they bring good intentions but no particular insight: “What the fuck does any of this have to do with us?”
Trump, Putin, Xi – these men aren’t stupid. But they have no way of eliciting, recognizing, or assessing useful criticism
‘It’s almost impossible to find dissenting views in a totalitarian system where dissent is often punished.’
‘It’s almost impossible to find dissenting views in a totalitarian system where dissent is often punished.’ Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images
Fri 1 Apr 2022 11.00 BST
It appears that Vladimir Putin’s aides have misinformed him about the war, fearful of his reaction.
On Wednesday, American officials revealed that, according to American intelligence, Putin’s strict isolation during the pandemic and willingness to publicly castigate advisers have contributed to him getting incomplete or overly optimistic reports about the progress of Russian forces.
It’s the beginning of a new era in Washington – and Putin is responsible
Robert Reich
Robert Reich
Read more
“We believe he’s being misinformed by his advisers about how badly the Russian military is performing and how the Russian economy is being crippled by sanctions,” Kate Bedingfield, the White House communications director, told reporters. “Because … the senior advisers are too afraid to tell him the truth.”
As a result, the attack has been a catastrophe for Putin. He badly overestimated the Russian military and underestimated Ukraine’s capacity to resist.
Instead of weakening Nato, his attack has strengthened it. And now that the world’s democracies have cut off Russia’s access to the world banking system, Russia’s economy is in freefall.
Dictators like Putin are particularly vulnerable to inaccurate feedback. Instead of independent truth-tellers, they are often surrounded by truth-deniers.
Dictators like Putin are particularly vulnerable to inaccurate feedback
Rather than experts and investigative journalists, their world is filled with pseudo-scientists and propaganda. In place of a free press, they have agitprop and disinformation.
The higher you rise in any hierarchy, the harder it is to get accurate feedback about your decisions because people are afraid to tell you the truth.
Advertisement
I’ve worked with several presidents. All have made big blunders. I’ve also known and written about CEOs of big corporations who have made terrible mistakes. In every case, they had flawed systems for getting useful, accurate and reliable feedback.
Donald Trump (whom I didn’t work with, but whose every move I watched) made among the dumbest decisions of any American president in history. Some might say this was inevitable; it was built into Trump’s character. But his key character flaw was his unwillingness to hear anything negative.
Trump surrounded himself with toadies and sycophants who didn’t dare tell him the truth. He demanded that everyone around him confirm his preferred self-image of invincibility. His White House was filled with fawning lackeys (he fired anyone who didn’t grovel). He refused to hear bad news. He rejected the validity of negative media coverage.
Trump could have accomplished any number of goals far more easily had he not kept digging himself into ever-deeper holes. He was his own worst enemy.
Trump surrounded himself with toadies and sycophants who didn’t dare tell him the truth
Or look at China’s Xi Jinping. Why would he decide to enter into a “no limits” partnership with Moscow on the eve of Putin’s disastrous military campaign? Talk about blunders.
Xi’s alliance with Russia has undermined China’s reputation and aggravated concerns among its neighbors about China’s global ambitions. It has already prompted Taiwan to strengthen its defenses and pushed other regional powers such as Australia and Japan to declare their own interests in Taiwan’s security.
Advertisement
Trump, Putin, Xi – these men aren’t stupid. What’s stupid is their systems for making decisions.
They don’t include naysayers. They have no way of eliciting, recognizing or assessing useful criticism. All are trapped in halls of mirrors that reflect back at them what they want to see and hear.
The inverse relation between how high people rise in a hierarchy and the accuracy of the feedback they receive can be overcome if a leader aggressively seeks out dissenting views.
But it’s almost impossible to find dissenting views in a totalitarian system where dissent is often punished. One of the great virtues of a democracy is its multiple feedback loops – its many channels for expressing alternative viewpoints and voicing uncomfortable truths.
After all, American democracy stopped Trump from doing even more damage than he did.
Yet when people like Trump, Putin, and Xi make terrible decisions, the world suffers. The world could even be annihilated.
MoD officials exploring legal challenges but Boris Johnson ‘full steam ahead’ with proposal
Superyachts in Cannes
Superyachts in Cannes, France. Allowing the royals to use one seized in the UK would be seen as a short-term, cost-saving option. Photograph: Westend61/Getty Images
Mari Tyme
Fri 1 Apr 2022 00.01 BST
A group of Tory MPs is lobbying Downing Street to consider commandeering one of the superyachts seized as part of the sanctions regime for use by the royal family.
The idea has won favour with some senior figures in No 10, which was widely criticised last year after it commissioned a “national flagship” for state visits by the Queen, reportedly costing £200m.
Allowing the royals to use a yacht would be seen as a short-term, cost-saving option.
Officials at the Ministry of Defence have started to scope out the legal and practical challenges for the prime minister, who is said to be “full steam ahead” with the proposal.
Advertisement
“These yachts are state of the art,” said royal biographer, Lila Proof. “But they were built as floating play palaces for oligarchs. The Queen has no obvious need for hot tubs and jetskis.”
Until 1997, the Royal Yacht Britannia sailed the Queen and other members of the family across the world.
But since it was decommissioned, the Windsors have had to rely on commercial ships – leading to one embarrassing incident when the royal limousine stalled on the ramp of a drive on, drive off ferry at Boulogne.
Earlier this week a £38m 200ft superyacht was seized at Canary Wharf, after the National Crime Agency raised doubts about who owned it and how it had been paid for.
Boasting a fresh-water swimming pool and wine cellar, it could now spend months or years being impounded.
The case prompted the Conservative MP and former submariner Shiv R M’Timbers to suggest this was exactly the sort of super yacht that could be used by Buckingham Palace.
“We might as well put these boats to some good use,” he said. “After all, the royals have a rich history of taking things that don’t belong to them, and never giving them back! But don’t quote me on that.”
Giant orchids that can reach a metre tall have officially been found growing wild in the UK for the first time, having become established hundreds of miles north of their native range in the Mediterranean.
The “stately” plants were discovered on a grassy slope near Didcot in Oxfordshire by Hamza Nobes, a 29-year-old trainee nurse, who wishes to keep the exact location a secret.
Nobes was out on a walk when he saw the pink flower five metres away from the path and assumed it was a butterbur, but clambered down the steep slope to get a better look, and then realised what he had found. The sweet-smelling orchid has many flowers on its stem, which are purplish-red in colour, and the leaves are broad and glossy.
“I was ecstatic. I’ve never really found anything, and I’m not a botanist in any way shape or form,” said Nobes, who has been interested in orchids for two years.
Typically found in southern and central Europe, the giant orchid (Himantoglossum robertianum) range is expanding north as the climate warms, with records showing the plant is able to survive in northern France and the Netherlands.
“It was weird, because a few weeks prior I was looking through my European orchid book and I was looking at the giant orchid and thought that’s such a beautiful orchid, it would be lovely to see one day, maybe in Greece or somewhere, but really it was just 10 minutes from my house,” he said.
One of the orchids found on a grassy slope near Didcot.
One of the orchids found on a grassy slope near Didcot. Photograph: Ian Denholm/Handout
It is not believed these plants arrived naturally, but rather by someone scattering seeds about 15 years ago, a practice discouraged by ecologists as it can result in invasive species. It is believed this is also how the species reached the Netherlands. In both cases, they managed to establish and are now reproducing themselves.
Locals say the plants flowered years ago and then vanished, but no official report was ever made. This year – perhaps benefiting from the sunny spring – there are nine flowering plants and 10 non-flowering plants, reaching a maximum of 30cm tall.
“It’s a very exciting find,” said Prof Ian Denholm, from the University of Hertfordshire, who is one of the UK’s two national orchid referees and visited the site to verify the find. “There was a [giant orchid] seen about 15 years ago, it wasn’t widely reported and it came as news to me in fact … it was never really made public, and the plant itself presumably didn’t last very long,” said Denholm.
Advertisement
Orchid flowers consist of three outer sepals and three inner petals, and in many species, one of the petals is highly modified as a lip to attract pollinators and give them a place to land. The giant orchid lip has lobes that fancifully resemble arms and legs, says Denholm. “It’s a very stately orchid. It lives up to its name of giant orchid. It’s got quite a long and dense flower spike.”
Orchids are good at telling us about the consequences of global heating, because there are so many orchid enthusiasts out recording changes in their range over time. Given the expansion of its range, experts say it’s feasible the giant orchid may have naturally colonised the UK at some point in the future.
There have been other reports of the tiny seeds of European orchid species blowing over the Channel to the southern counties of the UK, where they are increasingly able to survive. Last year, a colony of small-flowered tongue orchids – thought to be extinct in the UK – were discovered on the rooftop of an investment bank in the City of London. They are typically associated with central and southern Europe, and it is not known how the seeds arrived there.
“I always welcome new stuff,” said Sean Cole, a field naturalist and co-author of Britain’s Orchids. He said the find was another indication that our climate can increasingly support Mediterranean species. “We’ve got 53 or 54 species of orchids anyway, anything new is nice to have. It’s not really going to impede on anything else around it or take over. It comes from the near continent, so it’s kind of semi-natural to us, it’s not going to take over like Japanese knotweed or something.”
The orchid, which flowers in March, has proven a hit with early pollinators, including bumblebees, which have been seen on the flowers. “Our local bees have welcomed them, so then why shouldn’t we?” said Cole.
The Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland has a network of people who maintain local records and has been made aware of the discovery. Giant orchids are a non-native plants, so have no statutory protection. Orchid enthusiasts are now in communication with the owner of the site and are discussing how best to protect it.
Hundreds of adults and children with type 1 diabetes in England have been fitted with an artificial pancreas that experts say could become the “holy grail” for managing the disease, in a world-first trial on the NHS.
The groundbreaking device uses an algorithm to determine the amount of insulin that should be administered and reads blood sugar levels to keep them steady. The NHS trial has so far found the technology more effective at managing diabetes than current devices and that it requires far less input from patients.
Managing type 1 diabetes can be challenging, especially in young children, owing to variations in the levels of insulin required and unpredictability around how much patients eat and exercise. Children are particularly at risk of dangerously low blood sugar levels (hypoglycaemia) and high ones (hyperglycaemia), which can damage the body or even lead to death.
Advertisement
Now a new artificial pancreas worn next to the body – which continually monitors blood glucose levels and automatically adjusts insulin delivered via a pump – is being tested in 30 NHS diabetes centres. About 875 people have benefited so far in the first nationwide study of its kind in the world.
The technology can eliminate finger-prick tests to check blood sugar levels and prevent hypoglycaemic and hyperglycaemia attacks. Although most of the NHS’s estimated £10bn annual spending on diabetes treatment goes on type 2 diabetes, it is also hoped the devices will help cut costs by ensuring less need for interventions for type 1 cases.
“Having machines monitor and deliver medication for diabetes patients sounds quite sci-fi-like, but when you think of it, technology and machines are part and parcel of how we live our lives every day,” said Prof Partha Kar, the NHS national speciality adviser for diabetes.
“A device picks up your glucose levels, sends the reading across to the delivery system – AKA the pump – and then the system kicks in to assess how much insulin is needed. It is not very far away from the holy grail of a fully automated system, where people with type 1 diabetes can get on with their lives without worrying about glucose levels or medication.”
Charlotte Abbott-Pierce, six, was diagnosed just over a year ago and initially started on insulin injections but has now become one of the first people to benefit from an artificial pancreas.
She has been fitted with an insulin pump and a continuous glucose monitor that, as part of the world first pilot, now work together.
A woman with diabetes monitors her glucose levels.
People with type 1 diabetes in England to be given skin sensor to monitor blood sugar
Read more
Advertisement
Her mother, Ange Abbott-Pierce, said: “Before the hybrid closed loop system was fitted, my husband and I would be up every two hours every night having to check Charlotte’s blood sugars and most times giving insulin, sometimes doing finger pricks or dealing with ketones due to quick rises in blood sugar.” She said the new system was a “godsend to us as we were at our wits’ end with worry, not being able to catch the highs before they got dangerous”.
Chris Askew, chief executive of Diabetes UK, said: “This technology has the potential to transform the lives of people with type 1 diabetes, improving both their quality of life and clinical outcomes.”
The data collected from the pilot, along with other evidence, will be considered by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence when it looks at rolling the device out more widely.
Separately, new research on Friday reveals that even slim people can get remission from type 2 diabetes by managing their calorie intake.
A trial led by Prof Roy Taylor of Newcastle University found 70% of participants with a low body mass index (BMI) went into type 2 remission thanks to diet-controlled weight loss, despite not being obese or overweight. Obesity raises the risk of type 2 diabetes, but 10% of sufferers have lower BMIs.
His previous landmark research gave hope to millions of type 2 diabetics who were overweight by showing it was possible to go into remission through careful weight loss. It showed that shedding fat from inside the pancreas and liver – the two key organs involved in blood sugar control – was key to remission from type 2 in people living with obesity or being overweight.
Now researchers have found it also works for slimmer diabetics – with a BMI at or just above the healthy range, below 27. Taylor said: “This is very good news for everyone with type 2 diabetes.”
More talks needed on targets to protect wildlife as developing countries call for payment for finds based on their biodiversity
The Geneva biodiversity conference
The Geneva biodiversity conference in Switzerland, where the use of digital sequence information emerged as a key point of difference between the parties. Photograph: IISD/ENB
The age of extinction is supported by
theguardian.org
About this content
Patrick Greenfield in Geneva
@pgreenfielduk
Wed 30 Mar 2022 14.34 BST
A standoff over biopiracy is threatening to derail a global agreement to halt the loss of nature, with developing countries demanding they are paid for drug discoveries and other commercial products based on their biodiversity.
During negotiations in Geneva for a Paris-style agreement on nature, which ended this week, the use of genetic data in a digital form – known as digital sequence information (DSI) – arose as a clear point of division, with African countries insisting any deal must include a financial mechanism to compensate them for discoveries using digital forms of their biodiversity.
With echoes of tensions in climate talks over the failure of developed countries to meet the $100bn-a-year climate finance target at Cop26 in Glasgow, a large group of developing countries, including Brazil, India and Gabon, also called on rich nations to pledge more than $100bn (£75bn) a year of biodiversity finance from public and private sources at the Cop15 summit in Kunming this year, reaching $700bn by 2030.
Q&A
What is the Kunming biodiversity conference?
Show
The disagreement came after a slow fortnight of negotiations in Switzerland, which, despite progress in some areas, left the ambition of the overall agreement in the balance. Leading conservation organisations said talks had moved at a “snail’s pace” and further negotiations have been scheduled for the end of June in Nairobi to prepare for Cop15 in China.
From creating Covid vaccines to manufacturing drink sweeteners, the genetic sequences of plants, animals and other organisms in digital form have revolutionised biotechnology and life sciences research, leading to new HIV therapies, genetically modified crops and innovations in conservation.
Indigenous Amazonian men wearing headdresses in a boat on a river
Andre Sateré, right, and members of the Sateré-Mawé, Amazonas state, Brazil, collect herbs to treat Covid. Some fear such plants will be sequenced with no benefit to the countries of origin. Photograph: Ricardo Oliveira/AFP/Getty
Sharing Sars-CoV-2’s genetic code in early 2020 led to the rapid creation of Covid-19 tests and vaccines. It is hoped that similar techniques will lead to new cancer drugs and other innovations in a variety of sectors.
Advertisement
But during this week’s talks, countries from Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean warned that DSI has become a loophole for pharmaceutical companies and others to avoid sharing profits deriving from their flora, fauna and other forms of life – what has become known as biopiracy.
Sharing the benefits from genetic resources is one of the three objectives of the UN convention on biological diversity (CBD), through which governments are negotiating a Paris-style agreement for nature known as the global biodiversity framework, with draft targets to protect 30% of land and sea, reduce agricultural pollution and environmentally harmful subsidies.
Pierre du Plessis, a Namibian negotiator speaking for Africa, said that without a deal on DSI he would not allow the adoption of the entire agreement, warning that Cop15 in Kunming could become a “Copenhagen moment” for biodiversity, in a reference to when 2009 climate talks in the Danish capital collapsed.
“From an African point of view, we will not accept the adoption of the global biodiversity framework [without agreement on DSI]. It’s just an outcome too horrible to contemplate but if that’s what we need to do then that’s what we will do,” Du Plessis said.
Africa has proposed a 1% biodiversity levy on the retail price of all products based on genetic resources and DSI, with proceeds going to biodiversity conservation around the world. The idea is likely to face significant opposition from the EU, Canada and other rich countries.
A piece of a plant held with tongs is put in a test tube
Edgar Guanga, a farmer, puts a sample of a plant for scientists to extract DNA from as part of the Barcode Galapagos project in Ecuador. Photograph: Dolores Ochoa/AP
An agreement on the procedures to follow when asking to use genetic information, known as the Nagoya protocol, is already in place after concerns that companies were commercialising indigenous knowledge and genetic resources for nothing. But not all countries have ratified the agreement and they are allowed to make their own rules, which has meant DSI has become a grey area.
Advertisement
At the closing plenary session on Tuesday, countries signed off an agreement including further negotiations on DSI, which Du Plessis welcomed, but said there was a long way to go, amid fears that scientific and commercial research could get entangled in red tape if the issue is not resolved.
Leonardo de Athayde, head of Brazil’s negotiating team, said DSI was an important issue for his country that should be included in the final text.
“We’re open to considering different options as long as it generates money and provides an incentive also for sustainable use of biodiversity,” he said.
Other states warned that without an agreement in Kunming, access to biodiversity in their country for scientific and commercial research would face increased bureaucracy.
Dr Amber Hartman Scholz, a researcher from the Leibniz Institute DSMZ and a leading expert on DSI, said whatever was agreed in China must be simple while also maintaining free and open access for scientific research around the world. Currently, DSI is held on three main databases in Japan, Europe and the US.
昆明COP15 Kunming 2020 UN Biodiversity Conference official logo
Redirect harmful subsidies to benefit the planet, UN urges governments
Read more
“The changes that molecular biological data is going to make to our lives in the coming decades – cancer drugs, personalised medicine, everything where nature interacts with man – that’s all based upon sequence data. It’s going to blow our minds in the next 100 years,” she said.
“Sharing benefits from DSI is just, but paralysing science with red tape is not,” said Hartman Scholz. “We have to get this right.”
Li Shuo, a policy adviser for Greenpeace China, said DSI highlighted “some of the deepest ideological differences between CBD parties”.
“It is a scientifically and legally complex issue and is tightly connected to finance. With limited progress in Geneva, there are already too many bombs for Kunming to remove. DSI is certainly one of the thorniest that will detonate a chain of explosions if not managed carefully,” he said.
Flutter, the gambling company that owns Paddy Power and SkyBet, has agreed to buy the Italian operator Sisal in a £1.6bn deal that could have a significant bearing on the competition to run the UK’s national lottery.
In a statement to the stock market, Flutter said it had struck a deal with the private equity group CVC Partners to buy Sisal, a major Italian gambling and betting firm which also operates lotteries in Italy, Turkey and Morocco.
The Flutter chief executive, Peter Jackson, said buying the Milan-based firm would give the company a “gold medal position” in Italy, the second-largest regulated gambling market in Europe, after the UK.
Flutter said Sisal was fast-growing, particularly in online gambling, which increased by 20% in Italy as the Covid-19 pandemic drove punters to migrate online.
Advertisement
The takeover puts Flutter, whose brands include Betfair, Paddy Power and SkyBet, in contention to take over the UK national lottery.
Sisal is one of four firms bidding for the next 10-year licence to run the lottery. The Gambling Commission is expected to make a decision in February 2022 after a competition that has been prolonged several times, with the new licence due to start in 2024.
Sisal is up against Camelot, which has run the Lottery since its inception in 1994, and the media tycoon Richard Desmond, who already owns the Health Lottery. The biggest threat to Camelot’s 27-year incumbency is thought to be the Czech operator Sazka, which is bidding via a special purpose vehicle set up in the UK called Allwyn.
All of the bidders have submitted their final proposals and are waiting for the Gambling Commission’s decision.
However, Flutter did not mention the UK lottery in a statement attached to the announcement of its takeover of Sisal. The Guardian understands that Flutter has not factored the bid into its plans.
The takeover is not due to complete until April, by which time the national lottery decision will have been made.
While the Gambling Commission oversees all gambling activity in the UK, including lotteries, sports betting and casino games, it has typically treated the national lottery as a separate entity with specialist staff devoted to it.
Flutter is also the subject of an investigation by the commission, after the Guardian revealed that its SkyVegas brand offered “free spins” to recovering addicts.
Advertisement
If Flutter is not considered a suitable firm to run the lottery, that would leave Camelot, Sazka and Richard Desmond fighting it out for the lucrative 10-year licence.
Camelot has faced criticism, including from a parliamentary public accounts committee (PAC) report in 2018, that charitable donations have not always risen as fast as profits under its tenure.
Reggae singer Eddy Grant may succeed where the attorney general of New York state and other powerful figures have struggled – by forcing Donald Trump to answer questions under oath in a legal proceeding.
Grant sued the former president and his campaign over the use of the song Electric Avenue in an ad in 2020.
In the ad, Grant’s song plays over an animation of Joe Biden traveling slowly in a handcar, after a Trump campaign train passes at high speed. Remarks from Biden are also heard.
According to Grant’s lawsuit: “As of 1 September 2020, the video had been viewed more than 13.7m times; the tweet containing the video had been ‘liked’ more than 350,000 times, re-tweeted more than 139,000 times, and had received nearly 50,000 comments.”
Advertisement
Grant claims copyright infringement and seeks $300,000 in damages. Trump has failed to have the suit dismissed.
Lawyers for the former president have claimed fair use, saying the ad was satire, exempt from copyright law, and used footage reposted without knowing its origin. They have also said Trump cannot be sued because of “presidential absolute immunity”.
Last September, Judge John Koeltl wrote: “Defendants have offered no justification for their extensive borrowing.”
This week, in a letter to the judge reported by Business Insider, a lawyer for Grant said he wrote “with consent from defendants Donald J Trump and Donald J Trump for President, Inc … to request a 60-day extension for the parties to complete discovery”.
Exchange of documents had been completed, the letter said, but “additional time is needed to schedule and take the depositions of both parties”.
If the case is not settled and the new schedule is agreed, Trump and Grant will be deposed by 21 June.
Elsewhere in New York, Letitia James, the state attorney general, is trying to compel Trump to sit for deposition in her civil investigation of his business practices.
This week, James asked an appeals court to uphold a ruling requiring the former president to answer questions under oath.
James, who also wants to force Donald Trump Jr and Ivanka Trump to be deposed, has said she has uncovered evidence the Trump Organization may have misstated the value of assets on financial statements for more than a decade.
Photo of Eddy GRANT<br>UNSPECIFIED - JANUARY 01: Photo of Eddy GRANT; (Photo by Ian Dickson/Redferns)
How we made Eddy Grant's Electric Avenue
Read more
Advertisement
Trump rose to prominence in the 1980s. So did Grant.
Electric Avenue was a hit in 1983, reaching No2 in the UK and US. Discussing how he wrote it, Grant told the Guardian in 2018: “My big songs, like Electric Avenue, tend to come quickly. It’s like visiting the bathroom – you’ve really got to go.”
As it happens, Electric Avenue is a political song.
“I’d watched the Brixton riots unfold on television,” Grant said. “I’d seen the Notting Hill riots starting a few years previously.
“I wrote down: ‘Now in the street there is violence,’ and the song just flowed from there. I had been talking to politicians and people at a high level about the lack of opportunity for black people.”
The websites of energy providers are struggling to cope with a deluge of traffic on “bleak Friday”, as the largest increase in gas and electricity prices in living memory takes effect on the same day as a string of scheduled rises to taxes and household services.
Customers seeking to secure cheaper energy bills had been advised to submit meter readings online before Friday’s 54% increase to the cap on the average annual bill rises to £1,971, putting unprecedented pressure on the websites of suppliers.
The meter reading page of British Gas, one of Britain’s biggest suppliers, was displaying an error message on Friday morning, while E.ON and EDF were also battling with outages.
Households are facing multiple price increases scheduled for 1 April, from council tax and VAT on pints to broadband and phone bills, all adding to the cost of living crisis, with inflation forecast to hit a 40-year high later this year.
As snow and hail fell across the UK during a week when temperatures plunged, families and pensioners spoke of having to turn off the heating and disconnect broadband in order to afford the rising cost of food.
A screengrab of a message on the British Gas website.
A screengrab of a message on the British Gas website. Photograph: PA
The thinktank the Resolution Foundation said the number of English households in “fuel stress” doubled overnight, from 2.5m to 5m.
Advertisement
The Trades Union Congress (TUC) called for an emergency budget to help working families who are at “breaking point”, as Citizens Advice estimated that about 5 million people would be unable to pay their energy bills from this month.
The TUC said that the measures announced by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, in last week’s spring statement were “woefully inadequate”, as UK households face the biggest fall in living standards since the 1950s.
“People shouldn’t be struggling to cover the basics, but millions of families have been pushed to the breaking point by spiralling bills and soaring inflation,” said Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC. “This is a living standards emergency. Rishi Sunak must come to parliament and present an emergency budget. We need a proper package of economic support for families. Britain faces the worst living standards crisis in generations. We need an emergency budget to bring down energy bills and to boost pay, universal credit and pensions.”
Energy bills will rise 10 times faster than wages this year, said the TUC, and it joined Labour in calling for a windfall tax on the billions in profits made by oil and gas companies to pay for its package of suggested support measures.
“People don’t want a revolution, they do want to know how to pay their energy bills,” said the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, during an interview on Friday morning.
Advertisement
Citizens Advice warned that the number of people unable to pay their energy bills would rise to one in four across the UK, more than 14 million, if the energy cap rises by the amount forecast in October.
Experts have said the war in Ukraine could drive annual bills to £3,000 at the next price cap decision.
“We understand that people are struggling with the rising cost of living – we can’t shield everyone from the global challenges we face but we’re putting billions of pounds back into the pockets of hard-working families across the UK,” a government spokesman said. “We are taking action worth over £22bn in the next financial year to help people with the cost of their energy bills and to ensure people keep more of their money.”
Insiders divided about UK spy agency pushing such narratives after claim advisers ‘afraid’ to tell Russian leader truth
Russia-Ukraine war: latest updates
Russian President Vladimir Putin chairs a meeting with members of the government via teleconference in Moscow, Thursday, March 10, 2022. (Mikhail Klimentyev, Sputnik, Kremlin Pool Photo via AP)
01:55
Putin's advisers ‘afraid to tell him truth’ about Ukraine, says UK spy chief – video
Dan Sabbagh Defence and security editor
Thu 31 Mar 2022 14.08 BST
For a spy chief, it was an eye-catching claim. “We believe Putin’s advisers are afraid to tell him the truth,” the GCHQ boss, Sir Jeremy Fleming, confidently declared overnight to an audience in Australia.
The head of the British eavesdropping agency offered no details to back up his assertion – leaving the impression it was a piece of psychological warfare, of the “we know all is not well in the Kremlin” type.
Nor was it an isolated comment – a few hours earlier US officials were in similar terrain, showing the effort was coordinated. “We have information that Putin felt misled by the Russian military,” one said, stating that in particular the leader did not know at first that conscripts were being used in the war.
Advertisement
Given Russia’s failure to achieve a quick victory over Ukraine, such conclusions are on the face of it hardly surprising. And the Russian president’s dominance over the Kremlin and key figures within it is hardly a revelation.
What’s going on inside Putin’s mind? His own words give us a disturbing clue
Michel Eltchaninoff
Read more
Fleming’s remarks are intended to bring to mind how the Russian president publicly treated Sergei Naryshkin, the head of the SVR foreign intelligence agency, at a meeting intended to agree the recognition of self-proclaimed republics in Ukraine.
“Speak plainly,” a smirking Putin repeated as Naryshkin stumbled over his answers to the Russian leader, perhaps enjoying the moment of fear that played across the face of his subordinate, normally considered a powerful hardliner who has known the president since the early 1990s at least.
GCHQ insiders are reluctant to get into detail at the best of times, although they insist such Kreminology is not conducted idly. But it is hard to avoid the impression that such statements have a propagandist quality when they are inserted into a speech given by a spy chief and inevitably picked up by the media.
Fleming’s speech also contained another unsupported statement, that Russian forces have been “even accidentally shooting down their own aircraft”, which intended to refer to more than one aircraft – a statement that can only have the purpose of highlighting to the Kremlin what the west believes it can see.
Former Whitehall insiders are divided about whether it is wise for intelligence chiefs to make such sweeping statements. “My view is that Fleming should only speak on the basis of intelligence or he risks misinforming the west,” said one former intelligence insider, who asked not to be named.
Vladimir Putin meets members of the security council in Moscow on 21 February to recognise the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Vladimir Putin meets members of the security council in Moscow on 21 February to recognise the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and Luhansk. Photograph: Alexei Nikolsky/Kremlin Pool/Sputnik/EPA
Advertisement
But Lord Ricketts, a former national security adviser, said it was obvious that Putin had become “isolated and intolerant of criticism” and said it was a “continuation of the pre-conflict practice of putting out the intel assessment without revealing the sources”.
It is certainly true that prewar western intelligence predictions have been proven correct. They forecast that Russia would, on Putin’s orders, invade Ukraine and attempt to win a quick victory by encircling Kyiv and other major cities – although most thought the invaders would be more successful that has been proven.
But now Fleming appears to be seeking to personalise responsibility for the war. “It increasingly looks Putin has massively misjudged the situation,” the spy chief also said, again a fairly obvious comment, but arguably not very diplomatic given that almost any ceasefire and peace settlement will almost certainly have to involve the Russian leader.
There is also a risk that the west has become overconfident about Russian divisions and difficulties – and risked exaggerating claims, as happened in the run-up to the Iraq war. “It was true that an Iraqi unit had a 45-minute chemical weapon readiness order. That didn’t mean what was then said in parliament and reported in the media”, the long-serving former official recalled.
Article count
off
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has abruptly transformed the world. Millions have already fled. A new Iron Curtain is grinding into place. An economic war deepens as the military conflict escalates and civilian casualties rise.
It’s our job at the Guardian to decipher a rapidly changing landscape, particularly when it involves a mounting refugee crisis and the risk of unthinkable escalation. Our correspondents are on the ground in Ukraine and throughout the globe delivering round-the-clock reporting and analysis during this perilous situation.
We know there is no substitute for being there – and we’ll stay on the ground, as we did during the 1917 Russian Revolution, the Ukrainian famine of the 1930s, the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the first Russo-Ukrainian conflict in 2014. We have an illustrious, 200-year history of reporting throughout Europe in times of upheaval, peace and everything in between. We won’t let up now.
Tens of millions have placed their trust in the Guardian’s fearless journalism since we started publishing 200 years ago, turning to us in moments of crisis, uncertainty, solidarity and hope. We’d like to invite you to join more than 1.5 million supporters from 180 countries who now power us financially – keeping us open to all, and fiercely independent.
Unlike many others, the Guardian has no shareholders and no billionaire owner. Just the determination and passion to deliver high-impact global reporting, always free from commercial or political influence. Reporting like this is vital to establish the facts: who is lying and who is telling the truth.
And we provide all this for free, for everyone to read. We do this because we believe in information equality. Greater numbers of people can keep track of the global events shaping our world, understand their impact on people and communities, and become inspired to take meaningful action. Millions can benefit from open access to quality, truthful news, regardless of their ability to pay for it.
If there were ever a time to join us, it is now. Every contribution, however big or small, powers our journalism and sustains our future. Support the Guardian from as little as £1 – it only takes a minute. If you can, please consider supporting us with a regular amount each month. Thank you.
